CAN PUBLIC TRANSPORT COMPETE WITH THE PRIVATE CAR?
Public transport is often perceived to be a poor alternative for car use. This paper describes who may be open to use public transport more often, and how people might be persuaded to use it. A computerised questionnaire study was conducted among 1,803 Dutch respondents in May 2001. Results revealed that especially fervent car users disliked public transport. For them, the car outperformed public transport not only because of its instrumental function, but also because the car represents cultural and psychological values, e.g. the car is a symbol of freedom and independence, a status symbol and driving is pleasurable. So, for fervent car users, car use is connected with various important values in modern society. Infrequent car users judged less positively about the car and less negatively about public transport. Consequently, they may be open to use public transport more regularly. In contrast, many efforts are needed to stimulate fervent car users to travel by public transport, because in their view, public transport cannot compete with their private car. In this case, policies should be aimed at reducing the functional, psychological and cultural values of private cars, as well as increasing the performance of public transport and other (more) environmentally sound modes of transport on these aspects.
1. BACKGROUND
Private car use has grown rapidly during the last decades. The number of motorised vehicles in the world grew from about 75 million to about 675 million between 1950 and 1990. Around 80% of these vehicles were primarily used for personal transportation, i.e., cars and motorcycles1. The amount of passenger-kilometres by private car per capita increased by 90% (from 4,620 to 8,710 kms) in Western Europe between 1970 and 19901.
The increasing car use has generated various environmental, social and economic problems. Environmental problems concern the emissions of toxic and harmful substances, which, among other things, contribute to global warming, smog and acid precipitation. Next, scarce raw materials and energy are needed to produce and use cars. The extension of road infrastructure causes distortion and fragmentation of natural areas, which might disrupt natural habitats.

On the social level, car use threatens the urban quality of life because it is noisy, causes odour annoyance, local air pollution and yields traffic accidents. Transport has been identified as the main cause of environmental noise in OECD countries: about 16% of the population is exposed to noise levels from transport that might severely disturb sleep and communication. In 1998, 42,000 people were killed in traffic accidents in the European Union2. Moreover, less space is available for walking, cycling and playing, especially in urban areas. Whereas more and more people own a car, those without access to cars become more disadvantaged and socially isolated as workplaces, shops and leisure facilities relocate to suit car users3.

Economic problems of car use are related to the decreased accessibility of economically important destinations. Congestion in European cities is estimated to cost 100 billion Euro per year, and projected to double in the next decade3. Motorists are allowed to shift external costs such as accident costs, costs for managing environmental nuisance and noise, and maintenance of traffic safety to society as a whole.

The problems of car use might be reduced in different ways4. First, the negative impact per car and per kilometre driven may be reduced via technological innovations that, e.g., increase the energy efficiency of cars, reduce emissions per car kilometre or reduce the level of traffic noise. Technological solutions appear not to be sufficient to manage the problems listed above, because the effects tend to be overtaken by the continuing growth of motorised traffic in the world. Second, new road infrastructure may be constructed. This may reduce congestion, but environmental and social problems are likely to increase if this strategy is followed. Third, we may stimulate people to drive at other times or places. This will also especially be effective to reduce congestion problems, but less to reduce the environmental and social problems of car use. Fourth, governments may aim at reducing the level of car use, i.e., stimulate people to use other modes of transport, to combine trips or to travel less. Fifth, policies may be aimed at making people drive more safely or more environmentally friendly. All five types of solutions may be called for to effectively address the problems caused by car traffic.

This paper focuses on how people might be motivated to more often travel by public transport instead of by car. Paragraph 3.1 describes which people travel by car, and which people more often use other modes of transport, such as public transport. Paragraph 3.2 focuses on why people are more likely to travel by car or by public transport. First, judgements on the (dis)advantages of cars and public transport are described as well as group differences in these judgements. It is hypothesised that especially frequent car users judge more favourably the car compared to public transport. In contrast, people who hardly travel by car will judge relatively less favourably the car and relatively more favourably public transport. Second, the societal and personal significance of travelling, car use and the use of public transport is discussed. We hypothesised that the car is evaluated as being more important than public transport, because Western societies are geared to the regular use of cars5. Moreover, this will be especially true for regular car users, since they may have organised their lives in such a way that they became dependent on their car5. Third, we examined whether frequency of car use is related to people's awareness of the problems of car use and to their perceptions of the need for policy measures aimed at reducing these problems. It is hypothesised that frequent car users are less concerned by the problems caused by car use and evaluate transport policies aimed at reducing car use as less legitimate than infrequent car users do.
Importance of transport, car use and the use of public transport
Respondents indicated to what extent they agreed with the following 6 statements on the importance of travel, car use and the use of public transport for society and their lives. Respondents were divided at random in three groups. Thirty five percent of the respondents were asked about the importance of travelling in general, 31% about the importance of car use and 34% about the importance of travelling by public transport.
Scores could vary from 1 ‘totally disagree’ to 5 ‘totally agree’. The internal consistency of the three scales was sufficient: Cronbach's αmobility = .71; αcar = .81; αpublic transport = .75* . Therefore, for each scale, the mean scores on the six items were computed, after recoding the scores on the second item. The scores on the variables ‘importance of travelling / car use / use of public transport’ could vary from 1 ‘not important’ to 5 ‘very important’.

Problem awareness
Respondents indicated to what extent they were concerned about the following problems caused by car use: (1) air pollution, (2) exhaustion of scarce resources like oil, (3) space occupation resulting in less space for cyclists, pedestrians and children, (4) traffic unsafety, and (5) reduced quality of life in cities due to traffic noise and odour annoyance. Scores could vary from 1 ‘not at all concerned’ to 5 ‘very concerned’. The mean score on the 5 items was computed (Cronbach's α = .77). The resulting scores on the variable ‘problem awareness’ could vary from 1 ‘low’ to 5 ‘high’.

Legitimacy of transport policies
Respondents indicated to what extent they agreed with the following two items ‘Everyone should be free to use their car whenever they want’ and ‘The government has the right to reduce car use to safeguard environmental qualities and the urban quality of life’. In both cases, scores could vary from 1 ‘totally disagree’ to 5 ‘totally agree’.

Car use
Respondents were asked how many kilometres they travel by car in comparison to other modes of transport, like public transport, bicycle or walking. Subjective judgements were given on a 7 point Likert scale, ranging from 1 ‘almost always by car and almost never by other transport modes’ to 7 ‘almost always by other transport modes and almost never by car’ (see Table 1). To examine differences in perceptions and preferences between frequent and infrequent car users, the following three groups were distinguished: respondents who often or always travel by car (38%), respondents who use their car as well as other modes of transport (37%) and respondents who often or always use other modes of transport (24%).
3.2. Why do people drive a car?
3.2.1. Advantages of car use and use of public transport
Figure 1 clearly reveals that the car is evaluated more positively than public transport in nearly every respect. The car is especially more attractive than public transport because of its convenience, independence, flexibility, comfort, speed, reliability and because driving is perceived to be more pleasurable. The car also offers more status than public transport does. However, travelling by public transport is perceived to be safer than driving a car.

Fig. 1. Attractiveness of car use and the use of public transport

Car use is not only perceived to be more attractive than public transport to regular car users. Figure 2 reveals that even respondents who hardly drive evaluate cars as more attractive than public transport in nearly every respect. Respondents who usually do not drive only think the car is less safe, less cosy, more costly and it delivers not as many varied experiences than travelling by public transport.

Fig. 2. Evaluation of attractiveness of car use and the use of public transport by infrequent car users

A principal components analysis with varimax rotation was conducted to examine which dimensions could summarise the judgements about (un)attractive aspects of car use. Five factors had factor loadings higher than 1. These five factors accounted for 58% of the variance of the judgements on (un)attractiveness of car-use aspects and could be clearly interpreted (see Table 2). Below, only aspects having factor loading |> .45| will be discussed to interpret the factors.

Factor 1 accounted for 16% of the variance in the judgements. This factor reflects the independence and convenience of car use. Aspects loading > .45 on this factor were convenience, comfort, independence and flexibility. Factor 2 accounted for 12% of the variance in the judgements and reflects the ‘fun’ of car use, i.e., the aspects cosy, various experiences and pleasure had high loadings on this factor. Factor 3 also accounted for 12% of the variance. The aspect having high loadings on this factor, i.e., security, control, freedom and travel speed, refer to control and freedom. Factor 4 accounted for 10% of the variance. The aspects sexy, status and arousal loaded high on this factor, which refer to kick and status. The fifth factor accounted for 8% of the variance, and refers to the negative aspects of car use, i.e., travel costs, traffic safety and stress. Interestingly, respondents who think car use is safe and not expensive also think driving is stressful.
4. CONCLUSION
This paper described who drive frequently and why they do so. Further, we explored who may be open to travel by public transport more frequently, and how the use of public transport may be facilitated and stimulated.

Women, younger people, low-income groups and singles use their car relatively less often than do men, older age groups, higher income groups and couples and families. Car use was evaluated much more positively than public transport (except for traffic safety), even in the densely populated Netherlands, were public transport is widely available. Notably, respondents evaluated almost all car use aspects positively, although the car use is perceived to be expensive and not sexy. In contrast, the judgements of the public transport aspects are generally negative or neutral, aside from traffic safety. Strikingly, even respondents who hardly drive evaluated car use more positively than travelling by public transport in nearly every respect.

So car use indeed has many individual advantages compared to public transport. Considering only individual interests, it appears that public transport can hardly compete with the car. However, this does not imply that people cannot be persuaded to travel by public transport more often instead of driving. People may choose to do so out of collective interests, e.g., to safeguard environmental qualities and the quality of urban life. Results of this study indicate indeed that respondents who are concerned about the problems caused by car use evaluate policies aimed at reducing car use as more legitimate, while respondents who are less concerned about these problems more strongly think that the individual freedom to move should not be restricted. Problem awareness was also higher among people who use their car selectively compared to frequent car users. Furthermore, this study focused on the attractiveness of cars and public transport in general. It may well be that in specific situations travelling by public transport is more attractive compared to driving, e.g., the train might be preferred above the car for long distance travel between cities. This suggests that policy makers should not aim at banning people from cars completely, but only at stimulating people to use their car more selectively and to travel by public transport whenever possible and reasonable. Further, a distinction should be made between various types of public transport. For example, in the Netherlands, people generally especially dislike travelling by bus, while travelling by train is evaluated far more positively9. So it might be easier to persuade people to travel by train more often than stimulating them to travel by bus.

It appeared that five dimensions underlie the attractiveness judgements of car use: independence and convenience, the ‘fun’ of car use, control and freedom, kick and status, and negative aspects of car use (i.e., travel costs, traffic unsafety and stress). Frequent car drivers judge more favourably about all these factors than those who hardly drive. Comparable dimensions underlie the judgements on the attractiveness of public transport, i.e., independence and convenience, the ‘fun’ of public transport, freedom and control, and status and traffic safety. Infrequent car users evaluated these factors most favourably. A Danish study also revealed that frequent car users evaluate car use positively on many different aspects, while only a minority of the respondents had strong positive feelings towards travelling by public transport or cycling10. Interestingly, especially the car appeared to be much more than a means of transport (for more than half of these Danish respondents), while cultural and psychological values are hardly connected with travelling by public transport.

These results suggest that car users do not only travel by car because they need to do so, but also because they love driving. People also prefer to drive a car because of its psychological and cultural meanings11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Motorists can express themselves in the choice of their car and the way they use it and driving a car may cause feelings of control or feelings of superiority over others. Moreover, many people like to drive because they think driving is pleasurable, adventurous, and arousing. So, people also drive because they like to, and not (only) because they have a real utilitarian need for a car or a practical reason to drive19. Based on the correlational data presented here, we can not draw conclusions about the causal relationship between the attractiveness of travel modes and actual mode choices. People may drive much because they judge favourably about cars, but they may also have adjusted their opinions to their travel behaviour.

As hypothesised, car use was evaluated as being more important to respondents' personal life and to society than public transport was. However, this was only true for frequent car drivers. Respondents who hardly drive think public transport is more important to their personal life and to society than the car is. A study by Sandqvist and Kriström19 also revealed that especially frequent car users report that the car significantly contributes to their quality of life. Many policy makers think car use can not easily be reduced because car use enhances people's quality of life and fulfils important societal values. Based on the results of this study, we may conclude that this assumption is only true for frequent car users. People who hardly drive may be better off when the quality of public transport is improved and when car use is reduced. This will very likely improve their quality of life, not only because the personal and societal significance of public transport for them, but also because environmental and urban qualities will probably significantly improve in this case. Further research should address this point in more detail.

As expected, frequent car users are less concerned about the problems caused by car use than are infrequent car users. They also less strongly believe that the government has the right to reduce car use, and they more strongly value the individual freedom to drive than do infrequent car drivers. These results are in line with studies by Stradling et al.16 and Nilsson and Küller12. Stradling et al.16 found that the more people value the freedom connected to car use, and the more strongly the car contributes to their identity, the less they are willing to reduce their car use. Nilsson and Küller12 reported that people who are emotionally attached to their car drive their car more often and evaluate transport policies aimed at reducing car use as less acceptable.

Stimulating public transport use appears not to be an easy task, because public transport seems to be perceived as a poor alternative for car use. Especially fervent car users dislike public transport. For them, the car outperforms public transport on various aspects. They think the car is much more than just a means of transport. It also represents cultural and psychological values, e.g. the car is a symbol of freedom and independence, a status symbol and driving is pleasurable. So, for fervent car users, car use is connected with various important values in modern society. This may be one of the main reasons why they (more) strongly oppose policies aimed at reducing car use.

Infrequent car users judge somewhat less positively about the car and less negatively about public transport. Consequently, they may be open to use public transport more regularly, especially if they also consider the many problems caused by massive car users. However, since they already use their car selectively, they may not be able to reduce their car use (even) more. Many efforts are needed to stimulate fervent car use to travel by public transport, because in their view, public transport can surely not compete with their private car. In this case, policies should be aimed at reducing the functional, psychological and cultural values of private cars, as well as at increasing the performances of public transport (and other alternative modes of transport) on these aspects. Next, they should consider the problems of car use when making travel mode choices.